Let's say that again.
Mr. Lewis said what?
Mr. Lewis said that the foundation of every civilization is collecting.
That if it hadn't been for the collectors in all the great civilizations, they would have had none of the past to build upon.
You see, that's one of the theses of my book.
The Romans stole, not stole, they bought everything from Greece.
The Greeks took over from Egypt.
Egypt took over from... I start my book in Alexandria, of course.
And there is enough material...
where you can really get a profile of the collecting.
Well, it seems that every civilization has taken the treasures from the one before it and built up on it.
And the first thing that Hitler did was to ransack every library and every museum.
Oh, yes, he could.
He dragged all his loot to Germany, of course.
To keep or to destroy?
Oh, to keep.
Some were destroyed because they were ruthless, but most of it was to keep whatever he could.
But it seems that every conqueror has done that.
It's not unusual.
As recently as Saddam Hussein, who was savaging the museum.
Absolutely, absolutely.
That's the one thing they wanted to grab.
And in a milder, more pleasant fashion, America, being a rich country, is now absorbing the treasures through purchase and honest dealing.
But nevertheless, drawing together materials from other nations into this country so that researchers come to the great universities here to study.
If you read my time's piece, there's a little section in there on Texas.
And of course, the University of Texas has a fabulous collection that was put together in about 15 years.
And of course, when I was down there last year, I heard at least four British accents.
I mean, because that's where the material was.
Yes, exactly.
And then we'd have to go.
Well, there was a time, I'm not sure it's true now, but it still may be, when Mr. Lewis said that Yale was the center for 18th century English studies.
Indeed it is, and it continues to be.
And so that that was what he wanted to enlarge and add to, and did.
And did, in fact.
I love the fact that all this stuff didn't move to New Haven.
Well, he wanted it to be part of his house for many reasons, and that brings us to another thing.
Do you see the lantern here that you're sitting under?
I'll light it for you in a minute.
That lantern used to hang in Walpole's house, but Mr. Lewis said that objects are documents.
It was one of his favourite terms, that an object is a document.
What did he mean by that?
Well, he meant that you could read into an object as much as you could from a book.
He...
gave as an insult the work of archaeologists and the fact that you can build up the great civilization of Greece on a Roman vase.
There's so much to be seen tangibly within an object, so that he passionately fond of books as he was.
Nevertheless, he collected objects, too, to some extent.
Now, there are a great many things that are attributed to Walpole that he couldn't prove, so he didn't buy.
I have a very interesting quote from Roger Kennedy, who directs the Smithsonian in Washington, the Museum of American History.
We're talking about Texas, and one of the allegations over the years that they were buying a lot of junk as well as a lot of significant material.
And he said, you know, the junk is very significant.
This is Kennedy speaking.
He said, because to really truly understand the masterpiece,
Sometimes you really have to follow all of the failed efforts and all the junk, the path that takes you to the altar, so to speak.
Yes, quite.
That's a very interesting assertion.
I think that it's a parallel assertion that the object is a document.
We have to read out of it.
Yes, I think so, too.
I think so, too.
As a matter of fact, there are instances of this here, because you see there are several, if you look behind you, many volumes of the same title.
And the fact is that Walpole printed off his works at Strawberry Hill Press.
but made corrections after the first printing, and then the next printing was different.
So these are all variants, in other words.
All variants.
And he, too, wanted to have an example of every printing from that press.
Well, I think from a scholarly point of view, it's essential.
Yes, it is.
And you'd think that the last one would be the only one that was important, but you can see what the author did as he went along, how he improved it and how he altered it.
Now tell me a little bit about your own background.
Oh, well.
What brought you here?
Nothing very exciting.
I was born in England and brought up in England and met my husband who was fighting over there in World War II.
That was how we met and how I came over here.
But I had parents who were always interested in the 18th century, so I was brought up on a lot of literature in the period.
That appealed to Mr. Lewis.
And I happened to live in Farmington.
I was also interested in library work and worked in the
village library in Farmington for a number of years.
So that when Mr. Lewis's librarian retired, he called me and asked me if I'd take her place, which I did.
That's wonderful.
It was.
It was absolutely marvelous for me because we got along awfully well.
And did he ever tire of the excitement of the chase and the hunt?
Never.
Not until his dying day.
No, no, no.
He was after, he read every catalogue, was frantically keen to fill in any gap that there might be.
and was always interested in new material.
Was the object the collection, the building of a great collection,
You see, so many collectors acquire things, and then once they have them, they lose interest in them.
That would be an example.
Well, he sold off everything, remember, long before he died.
No, I don't remember in his case, but I have known collectors who've done that.
A friend of mine.
Jerome Curran is another example.
Yes, I've known collectors do that.
A friend of my mother was a great collector and sold everything, saying that it was within...
themselves, and they didn't need the object anymore.
No, Mr. Lewis was different, I think, partly because he was a creative man, and he was writing in and around his collection all his life.
He himself produced works from his collection, so they were his source material as well.
So the collection energized his own work as much?
It did.
It did very much so.
Well, his great work, of course, was editing the letters of Franz Walpole, the 50-volume
Well, is it fifty?
Well, I mean, it doesn't matter.
Forty-eight gardens.
This is the old library, right?
No, this is called the East Library.
This is the East Library, and there are apparently four libraries in the city?
There are many, really, because...
They ramble all over the house.
The old library is in the front of the house.
You probably haven't been in it because it has nothing to do with Horace Warthogne.
They're family books that he inherited and came from his wife's family and they're very beautiful books too.
But this is the East, his own library over there because his desk is where Marie sits now.
That's called the North Library.
The new library is the great big room.
That room that I was in was quite extraordinary.
Yes.
And then there are what are called the stacks that are upstairs here.
And then down underneath the print room, there's a squash court, a filled-in squash court, filled with books.
He didn't play squash.
He did.
It was when he first lost the game that he decided to turn it.
What, really?
I'm not joking.
He lost the game.
Well, he was extremely good.
And when he began losing, let's say, several games in a row, and he realized he wasn't as good as he was, he then thought, well, I need the space for something else anyway.
So he turned it all into it.
I think age was catching up on him.
Roughly, where was he, did you say, in terms of age?
I'm not quite sure, because it was before my day.
I could find out.
Can I call you sometime, by the way?
Could you give me your phone number in case there's... 677.
8461.
846, because I'm sure there might be, that's 203, right?
I'm sure there might be some things I forget to ask you.
Well, I do, because I wouldn't mind in the least, and I'm retired, and I'm there all day, most of the day.
Okay, and this room again, you say this was kind of his favorite room?
Well, I think so.
I really think it was this one and the north side.
It's certainly not the most beautiful room.
Well, no, because you see, he used it as a workroom.
Actually, it was different in his day.
Were all these file catalogs here?
Absolutely.
He was very keen on using all modern, at that time, of course, now... If there were computers in his day, he'd have bought one, in other words.
Oh, he'd have gone into the computer business.
He was always on top of everything.
In his day, this kind of card catalog was the system.
And during the war in Washington, he was in charge of
cataloging intelligent information and making it available for all the forces.
So he was very keen on making it possible for people to get the information they wanted.
So I'm perfectly certain he'd have gone into computers right away.
Again, let's get back to a little bit of the personality.
He had a strong personality, and he had a charming sense of humor.
He had very
definite opinions about things, and he didn't suffer fools gladly.
He liked people to be very genuine, and he could spot somebody who was genuinely interested in what he had as against people who were just asking idle questions.
Do you think that the importance of his collection was recognized early?
By some, definitely.
I mean, for Yale, clearly, by the decision alone to publish 48 volumes of the letters, that's not an idle commitment to the point of any press.
Not at all, no.
That's a major commitment.
But it's not only the fact that he collected the letters, which he did.
If he couldn't get the original, he had a photocopy made.
It was not only the collection of the letters, but... You see, this is where the collector makes a compromise with the scholar.
Yes.
The true collector would just want the artifacts.
The scholar wants to have the material as well.
He needed the material, exactly.
He wanted to make... That's very important, I think.
Well, also for Horace Walther's sake, he wanted to have a complete edition of his letters correctly edited.
They'd been done before, but they weren't all correct by any means, which is why he redid it.
And he had a splendid team of editors working down at Yale, in New Haven, on the letters.
But they sent the draft of all of their work up to him, and he went through it.
And he was particularly keen on making the notes extremely readable.
They're in the simplest English language.
Nothing difficult to understand.
He hated academic jargon.
He wouldn't have any kind of jargon.
How many years was the project?
Oh, God.
I mean, I used to have all the numbers.
Well, I mean, it must have been several decades.
Yes, it was.
It sounds like the Adams family project that the Massachusetts Historical Society is going to go on into the next century.
Well, one of Mr. Lewis's achievements is that he did it.
This was the first edition of all of the big ones, but he completed it.
It really is quite a story.
It is a story.
And I think one reason that he managed to complete it was that he refused
to be to go on any kind of detours if his scholarship he advocated the letters and even though the scholars working on them found fascinating information and material unless it was absolutely permanent he cut it out much to their distress so he kept the notes and the work on a very narrow straight path it wasn't easy to do because so many fascinating things turned out he said no we have to
and not go down side streets.
He didn't.
Did he ever chat about any of his great finds?
Can you think of any?
Yes, well, he's told them in Collector's Progress, if you remember.
That's the best.
His best anecdotes are in there.
Okay.
Did he ever get together with other collectors?
Oh, very much so.
He belonged to various collection clubs.
The grower, of course, I'm sure.
And there were many friends and kids who were collected.
What's your sign?
I have an appointment.
I can see that.
Okay.
Oh, I think you can read.
32 or 32.
The letter's 32 or 32.
Yeah, but the first volume didn't come out until 37.
Then the last volume came out in 83.
Yes, you write those figures now.
That's what I used to know.
Thirty-seven to eighty-three.
So I said decades, and that was forty-six years.
Yeah, that's interesting.
Wow.
So this is not, as I mentioned, it's not an idle commitment.
I mean, they must be very, very important.
Yale would do something like this.
Well, he funded it.
He funded it.
It had a lot to do with the fact that he provided the money.
Well, would Yale still have done it, do you think?
Not if they had had to throw money in, because they'd always been short of cash.
Do you know offhand of what it cost him?
But I'll tell you, they wouldn't fund just anybody with money.
They have to have it live up to the standard that they expected it to be.
He means that often in that article on hospital correspondence, it tells the importance of it.
It's that often, I'll get it for you, because it tells you why it's as important as this.
Okay.
So he funded it.
Was it a significant
Oh, very much so.
But don't ask me what it was.
I never worked on the financial end of it.
Was the source of his wealth, was it family wealth?
Yes.
And his wife, apparently.
And his wife had great inheritance, too, from the Orkin-Closkey family.
Indeed.
And she died, of course, young, apparently, a young woman in... Yes, well, in 1960.
...57, I think, in 1959, and young, young... Terrible for them, because they would have voted to one another, so it was very sad.
Did she participate in the enthusiasm for the collection?
Very much so, yes.
Because so often, you know, you find that, like when Bradley Martin dies, you know, his library is up for sale within a year.
Oh, I know.
But then in other cases, you find where it is a...
very much of a symbiotic kind of a synergistic, I guess, is a better word.
Mrs. Lewis, it was she who started the printable collection.
Oh, really?
Yes, which went along with this, you see.
Is this something you could show me, do you think?
Yes, absolutely.
Print them next.
Okay.
And Joan is a zeroxing.
Oh, great.
That's Mr. Wilson's own article on the correspondence on the 73 South Side.
I can have this?
Yes.
Oh, that's great.
Do you have an appointment?
Yes, everyone, and I just hope thank you for coming.
Thank you for having me and spending so much time with me, and it'll bear good fruit.
We look forward to it.
We always ask slightly if an author will send you something.
Without question.
It's, we hope, on Warpole's own books.
Warpole's own books are on the shelves in the very same order they were in at Strawberry Hill.
And the only time they're not is when they don't fit.
How did he know that?
When they were removed, did they...?
They were catalogued in Warpole's day.
With shelf marks.
Yes, with shelf marks.
And then Mr. Lewis devised a number system so that they would bring them all together.
And, of course, he has a copy of the original catalog, which...
The original one is held by the Walpole family in England.
So they allow him to make a photography of it.
And so judging by that, he knows that, well, this is the beginning of the collection of the A's.
They went impressive A, B, C, D, E, F, G, or around the library and the Gothic costumes he built for himself.
Which is closer than C2 as you can gather.
Yes.
Which have two seats.
This is the book plate with press A, the shelf number, and the number along the shelf.
Is that Walpole's hand?
This is Walpole's hand.
No, that is not.
That's Walpole's book plate, of course.
And that's Mr. Lewis's book plate.
Yes, and probably we'll find some Walpole's.
No, not in this, but in some of the books, you see, he's annotated.
He wouldn't have annotated one like that.
These are gatherer repairs that are being done?
Well, it's oiling the covers.
Walpole kept copies of his letters in those.
All the letters are now in files, so that those folders are empty.
The former squash court.
This part is a mixture of books, but mostly prints.
And that is the former squash court, which is now the print room.
That's it.
I'm just going to put this camera down here.
Now whose interest was in the Prince?
Was that Mr. Lewis?
This is Mrs. Lewis's, so this is not really the Walpole collection.
No, but he took as great an interest in it.
It is part of Walpole collection.
Well, is it 18th century?
18th century, satirical, political princess.
And, of course, many of them.
Walpole himself collected them, you know.
So some of Walpole's own prints are here, with his annotations.
Eighteenth-century satirical?
Satirical.
And they made it all English, basically.
Yes.
Let me show you.
May I show you?
Yes, come on.
Can I see you, please?
And this is what Walpole did.
John Hall.
That's right.
That's the fan.
And that's again.
I just want to show you.
Anyway, here is one.
Here's a frame, many of them.
But you see, this is a sort of thing Walker did.
This was Duke of York to explain who that is.
Queen and Lear King, in case you didn't know.
That's cute.
But it's interesting that he collected those.
It's rather as if you collected the cartoons from the New York Times.
And this was the squash court, right?
Yes.
Which is attached to the garage, which is attached to the house.
Etchings by Henry William Bunbury, B-U-N-B-U-R-Y.
And after his designs, wow.
And this is a... Would you say this is an elephant folio size?
Yes.
And they haven't really foxed at all.
Have they been treated at all?
Yes, they couldn't have been treated.
They're nicely restored.
And then they couldn't put down.
These... Walcons.
I think it's quite a collection, too, wasn't it?
Is there something I can have?
Well, it's also in the thing right there.
It's already there.
Oh, great.
Oh, this is wonderful.
All of this is in there?
Well, then there's another one.
I don't think I need all this.
And so you do have a collector, collecting a collector.
And that means that so many of the books in the other half of the house are not 18th century, they go far behind them.
I mean, there's a book that belonged to Queen Lisbeth first, in that idea.
Really?
Because Orpo owned it.
And he collected it?
He collected it.
He acquired it as a collector?
He did.
And so then Mr. Lewis acquired it because Warpole had it.
That's very interesting.
So we had a chain.
Did they, as collectors, did they, no, no, I don't know if that'll work, but I mean, did they collect the same kinds of things?
Obviously, they had some of the points collecting the other way.
Well, Mr. Lewis certainly collected the same kind as Warpole for that reason, but Warpole's collection was unique and strange because he didn't collect the classics of his time the way you and I might collect first editions as authors now.
he collected books that helped him with what he was interested in.
He was writing a history of Richard III, for instance, so he collected around that subject.
And anything that Walpole himself wrote about, he collected books to go with his own whatever it was he was interested in.
I think that explains very well.
This is Joan.
That's how you speak.
Yes, it is.
And Mr. Lewis always brought Warhol into the conversation.
Did you know him?
Oh, let me go.
Really?
Could you tell me a little bit about him as an individual, particularly as a collector and his enthusiasm and his passion?
It was very impressive.
His enthusiasm and passion, you know.
Catherine and I felt that he became
And he'd come across here twice again.
Come across now.
Describe to me.
And the door directly opposite where we're standing, here in the print room, is to the new library, the large room with the chandelier.
So he'd come across here at noon and at 3.30 in the afternoon.
He napped every day.
Yes.
And then he would come and want to see something that we had to tell him.
Or if he'd bring something in the hand to tell us.
He wanted to see something.
He wanted to communicate.
What kinds of things could you have to tell him that he didn't know?
Something you had just discovered about the... Yes, we often did that.
We often did work to discover.
for him that day.
And it was really exciting.
It was contemporary.
Yeah.
It all brought the 18th century up today.
There were many exciting things.
Sometimes we'd find a note in the wall of his hand that he hadn't seen before.
Sometimes you'd find a note in the wall of his hand that he hadn't seen before.
Yes.
That Mr. Lewis had not seen.
Had no seen.
That happened quite often.
It was extraordinary, really, how many times.
And then, of course, it depended what book he was writing or everything he was writing, so we knew what he was interested in.
Even as a piece of marginalia, perhaps.
Yes, that's what I meant.
Or we'd get a new batch of prints in, and somebody would recognize Orpo's hand on one.
In other words, if it wants to Orpo.
Now, for instance.
We were going through a very large collection given to you by Judge Erna Reed.
As you just pointed out over here, too, his hand.
We got to do with his hand extraordinarily well.
He leapt from the page if we ever saw it.
It was very seldom any doubt once we saw it.
Now, I don't imagine either of you women are collectors.
Do you collect things?
Well, no, I inherited a collection.
I have a collection in my house, but I didn't collect it.
I'm just wondering if you, having worked so closely with a major collector, and you said that his enthusiasm is infectious.
Well, because... Did you ever feel like he might catch the bar?
But he would engage you in his enthusiasm.
Oh, yes.
That is true.
I mean, you didn't look and say, my God, why did he do this?
Well, once he left here, he went back in the 20th century, and once he stepped out of the building, he had to go to a very fine court.
Did you find that when you came in here, however, you did step into the 18th century?
Very much so.
Was that a pleasant...?
Yes, it was.
It was absolutely enthralling, and of course we were not really in the 18th century because we didn't have the...
We had all the comforts of the 20th.
But was it his presence as much as the material that did that?
Do you feel that way now when you come in, for instance, that you go back into the 18th century?
Oh, yes.
Presence is a material that sounds good.
You can still hear his voice.
You can still imagine.
From all accounts, he was a really, very nice man, a very likable man.
Everything you read about him is that he was just a genuine... He was a very charming man.
Extremely distinguished to look at.
And with wonderful manners.
He was definitely of the old school.
He was a very charming, delightful person.
That's great.
I think I've probably covered everything that we have to cover over there.
Well, your interest mainly is in the...
No, it's in the manuscripts, it's in print, it's really writing about the individual.
It sounds important.
But one important thing that he stressed often was that if you are a collector, you have to restrict your area to a very small area.
And restricting himself to Walpole in the beginning was
making it small but he said that in later in later on in his life that he'd known how huge the field was he never would have undertaken it really because he started as a young man collecting all kinds of english literature that appealed to him and then realized that he had to focus on something special then the other thing was do you think you probably want to give you the other thing and then i'll ask you a question he chose a field that had not really been done before
And when young people used to come to him and say, Mr. Lewis, if you were my age now, what would you collect?
He'd say, try to think of something that nobody's in the least bit interested in.
It's good advice.
As today, it's good advice.
A long time ago, he used to say, try something around 1900 or 1910.
Because everybody, the great collectors were collecting in the 18th century.
A little earlier, when he was a young man, nobody thought of anything after the 17th century was interesting.
When you read my piece, something in the New York Times, you'll see that that's what Texas did at an institutional level.
They wanted to build a great collection, but everybody was collecting 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries, so they focused on the 20th century.
Because nobody else was interested in it.
They basically followed his advice at an institutional level.
This is what he used to tell young people.
Find something that is
obviously going to be of interest to future generations.
Get out ahead of them.
Or just try to get in on the wrong floor, because otherwise the expenses are too great.
If you're a young man with a little money, you couldn't possibly compete with the older material.
You must read my piece Sunday, because this is precisely what I'm writing about in this piece.
Did he have it in his mind, do you think, did he want to be perceived as a great collector?
I don't know.
I think he would, he certainly appreciated being praised for having done something very unique for Yale, but I don't think he was as egocentric as, a lot of people did think he did
It was a big deal about himself, but I don't think so.
His collection was everything to him for Yale and for civilization.
He definitely does.
That's exactly the way Walpole himself thought about collecting.
Is Walpole on record about collecting, by the way?
I don't know.
Walpole had about seven different kinds of collections, not only books, but he collected coins and prints.
It's a great study.
I mean, I might really have to smoke over time.
And I think, I suppose, all the great collectors, all through the ages, have had that same idea, that you bring together material for future generations, that you're doing the public a service.
You're preserving, and you're not just acquiring, but you're preserving, and you're passing on.
And in his case, he really was passing it on.
I know a lot of collectors who do collect just for themselves.
They're not thinking necessarily of passing it on.
Oh, I think, yeah, because when they died, I mean, the stuff is sold off.
Even, you would hope in many cases, when it's really significant, like the Bradley Martin ornithology stuff, that definitely should have been kept together because it was extraordinary.
Now George III, King, was a great collector, and he gave it all to the foundation of the British Museum.
I wonder what they're going to do with it when they move.
I don't know, but that made me think of Queen Mary, who was also a tremendous collector in her day.
She died only recently.
But I don't know whether she was collecting for the Crown, for the nation, or for herself.
I really don't know.
I've never discovered there is such a thing as a Queen Mary collection, though she collected madly.
She had the passion.
Really?
This is the... The present Queen's mother.
The much beloved, as they often say.
Well, she was, but I think her mother was even more beloved.
I'm going to check that out.
But we never hear about her collection, do we?
No, because she collected many, many things, but I'm not quite sure.
What would you say about Mr. Lewis's buying?
He would ever buy from an individual?
Well, if somebody had a treasure that Mr. Lewis wanted, whether a manuscript, a book, or an object, he would have that person get it appraised properly by Sotheby's, Christie's, or some renowned... Or a quarry or somebody like that.
Yes, some great appraiser.
And then he would pay the correct price.
So the person could be reassured in his mind or her mind that they were getting fair value.
Absolutely.
And then he would pay whatever the going price was.
I've just not heard of anybody doing that before.
Generally speaking, you try and get it at your best price.
That's very noble.
I think he always felt it was fair.
And it turned out to be extraordinarily fair and in his favor because so often the going price
years ago was incredibly low and it's mags for instance the booksellers have let mr lewis have any number of treasures that they could have sold for much much more if they hadn't sold them of course it certainly gave him credibility and he gave the right price always oh the dealers in london used to come to him immediately they had anything immediately they gave him access to everything that's great that's very important
It was always an investment.
If you talk about how things appreciate and value, what he spent
I mean, he never had the intention of saving again, but he had childish pleasure in knowing that what he had was worth half.
Well, I went through a few of the books in there, the Johnson Dictionary, for instance, and he has still in pencil what he paid, and then he... Oh, in the front of every book.
And then he found a citation maybe 20, 30 years later when it was worth 650 pounds as opposed to the 30 that he paid for it, and I'm sure he had a great deal of satisfaction.
Oh, he did.
And I love that.
We all joined in that.
That's the true, that's the collector there.
Yes.
But then again, you see, one of our jobs was to go through the catalogues.
John would go through the catalogues for prints, and I'd go through the books.
And of course they had prices everywhere, the sale catalogues.
And one of the fun was to sort of point out to him, Mr. Lewis, if you notice this.
I mean, we used to join in the fun of it.
And how long have you been here, John?
I don't think the year.
Twenty-five years.
So you knew Mr. Lewis for quite a while ago?
Yes, he knew me.
Are you from Farmington?
Yes, I live here.